The magnetization of hematite-bearing sedimentary rocks provides critical records of geomagnetic reversals and paleogeography. However, the timing of hematite remanent magnetization acquisition is typically difficult to constrain. While detrital hematite in sediment can lead to a primary depositional remanent magnetization, alteration of minerals through interaction with oxygen can lead to the post-depositional formation of hematite. In this study, we use exceptionally-preserved fluvial sediments within the 1.1 billion-year-old Freda Formation to gain insight into the timing of hematite remanence acquisition and its magnetic properties. This deposit contains siltstone intraclasts that were eroded from a coexisting lithofacies and redeposited within channel sandstone. Thermal demagnetization, petrography and rock magnetic experiments on these clasts reveal two generations of hematite. One population of hematite demagnetized at the highest unblocking temperatures and records directions that rotated along with the clasts. This component is a primary detrital remanent magnetization. The other component is removed at lower unblocking temperatures and has a consistent direction throughout the intraclasts. This component is held by finer-grained hematite that grew and acquired a chemical remanent magnetization following deposition resulting in a population that includes superparamagnetic nanoparticles in addition to remanence-carrying grains. The data support the interpretation that magnetizations of hematite-bearing sedimentary rocks held by $>$400 nm grains that unblock close to the N\'eel temperature are more likely to record magnetization from the time of deposition. This primary magnetization can be successfully isolated from co-occurring authigenic hematite through high-resolution thermal demagnetization.


The mineral hematite is common in sedimentary rocks like sandstone. Hematite can give sedimentary rocks a red color and such that they are often called "red beds" by geologists. Hematite can record the ancient geomagnetic field giving Earth scientists a tool for discovering geomagnetic reversals and reconstructing continental motion. Hematite in sedimentary rocks can either arrive as grains at the time of deposition or grow in the rock afterwards. Determining which is which is essential for correctly interpreting data from these rocks. This study uses mud chips that were plucked up and redeposited in a 1.1 billion-year-old river to demonstrate the presence of both types of hematite. While these two hematite populations are the same mineral, they are of very different sizes. Highly sensitive measurements on magnetometers show that the secondary hematite consists of grains that can be smaller than 30 nanometers (0.03% the width of a 100-micron-wide human hair) while primary hematite that was deposited in the river is >400 nm and up to the width of a human hair or more. These data provide robust physical constraints on protocols that paleomagnetists use to separate the magnetic directions held by primary and secondary hematite in ancient rocks.
